One step forward, an easier interoperability between Rust and Haskell (#23)
input-output-hk/engineering: blog/2023-01-24-hs-bindgen-introduction.md

---

> slug: 2023-01-23-hs-bindgen-introduction

Author: ```suggestion
slug: 2023-01-24-hs-bindgen-introduction
```

One typical use case concerns cryptographic primitives which must be very performant. The first use case that Iñigo Querejeta Azurmendi (Cardano Lead Cryptography Engineer) brought me consisted in replacing a cryptographic library used by [`cardano-base`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-base). Namely, replacing [`cryptonite`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-crypto/blob/develop/cbits/cryptonite_sha512.h), a library written in Haskell and C, with [`sha3`](https://crates.io/crates/sha3), a Rust library (or "crate").

> **Why FFI (Foreign Function Interface)?**
>
> Solving the [interoperability](https://docs.rust-embedded.org/book/interoperability/) problem means:
> 1. designing a protocol that allows two codes written with different languages and using different runtime systems to communicate
> 2. designing tools and methods to build, to bundle, and to distribute such polyglot code bases (what developers fear most)
>

> > Why not just use, e.g., [Google Protobuf](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers) over a [Unix Domain Socket](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket)? How to make a choice in this landscape of solutions available? First, I will argue that we want something fast, say, by reducing its overhead to the minimal footprint of extra computations. So, we want to avoid use of any OS capabilities, like I/Os (that will cost you a full roundtrip) and the needs (De)Serialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> As our main criterion is performance, we want a solution with a minimal overhead. In particular we want to avoid the use of any solution that relies on slow IPC (Inter-process communication) and on costly data (de)serialization.
> It leads us to exclude solutions such as, e.g., using [Google Protobuf](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers) over a [Unix Domain Socket](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket).
```

Author: I think this is important to remind that relying on any syscall (like I/O) will be a major performance bottleneck. So, I'm not sure about the distinction between slow VS fast IPC protocols?

>

> > FFI looks like the right choice, it doesn’t rely on any syscall, at runtime they just behave as a jump in memory. Unfortunately, it comes at a cost of careful special attention on following call-conventions and handling memory management, we will come back to it later!

Author: To me, it's a bit weird to call `FFI` an `IPC`, since it will share the same process (or at least the same memory addresses space).

> > FFI looks like the right choice, it doesn’t rely on any syscall, at runtime they just behave as a jump in memory. Unfortunately, it comes at a cost of careful special attention on following call-conventions and handling memory management, we will come back to it later!

Reviewer: Ah yes, you could replace "IPC" with something like "communication channel" perhaps?

I've introduced IPC because you mentioned that you wouldn't select Google protobuf for two reasons (basically slow communication channel (because Unix domain socket -> syscall -> slow), and data (de)serialization).

For FFI the "communication channel" is shared memory and there is almost no data (de)serialization (just massaging of values using traits iiuc).

---

Alternatively you could drop every mention of IPC/"communication channel" entirely, including mentions of Unix Socket Domain. Just mention that data serialization must be the most efficient, so no Google protobuf, no yaml, etc.

So, what's lacking in Haskell ecosystem? Let's take a look at what kind of integration other languages offer with Rust:

* From **X** to Rust with X=**C**, [`rust-bindgen`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-bindgen)

* From Rust to **X** with X=**C**, [`c-bindgen`](https://github.com/eqrion/cbindgen) and X=**ECMAScript**, [`wasm-bindgen`](https://github.com/rustwasm/wasm-bindgen)

* Both with X=**C++**, [`cxx`](https://github.com/dtolnay/cxx) and X=**Python**, [`PyO3`](https://github.com/PyO3/pyo3)

This list isn't exhaustive but give you a hint, all these projects are about generating bindings (bindgen)!

> **Why bindgen (bindings code generation)?**
>
> Let's sum it up by: _"A good FFI is an FFI that you don't write …"_
>
> FFI are like a blind spot in your type system. Writing them manually is both frankly painful and really dangerous, as your compiler will not save you of non-matching interfaces.
>

> > Binding generation comes to the rescue by considerably reducing the room for human errors, and as a bonus, it simplifies a lot of maintainer job with a more readable reduced codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Binding generation comes to the rescue by considerably reducing the room for human errors. As a bonus, it also makes maintainers' life easier thanks to a smaller and more readable code base.
```

## Example

So, let's look at a minimal example. In this case, if we annotate a function like this:

```rust
use hs_bindgen::*;

/// Haskell type signature are auto-magically inferred from Rust function
/// type! This feature could slow down compilation, and be enabled with:

> /// `hs-bindgen = { ..., features = [ "full" ] }`

Author: It actually depends on how `hs-bindgen` is installed in four crate:
```shell
cargo add hs-bindgen
# VS
cargo add hs-bindgen --features full
```
And yes, I choose to disable this feature by default because inferring signature requires a hack that I prefer to keep optional. The code would look like that if we rather explicitly declare wanted Haskell signature:
```rust
use hs_bindgen::*;

#[hs_bindgen(CString -> IO ())]
 fn greetings(name: &str) {
     println!("Hello, {name}!");
 }
 ```
I guess I could rather use this piece of code in my article, so I keep it simple, and I don't advertise a feature that I on purpose decide to be opt-out by default!

> /// `hs-bindgen = { ..., features = [ "full" ] }`

Reviewer: Ah yes that would be better, otherwise anyone trying to reproduce your example will wonder why it doesn't work.

Keep the type inference feature for a future blog post perhaps :)

#[hs_bindgen]
fn greetings(name: &str) {
    println!("Hello, {name}!");
}
```

… it will be expanded to (you can try yourself with [`cargo expand`](https://github.com/dtolnay/cargo-expand)):

```rust
use hs_bindgen::*;

fn greetings(name: &str) {
    println!("Hello, {name}!");
}

> #[no_mangle] // Mangling randomize symbols

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#[no_mangle] // Mangling makes symbol names more difficult to predict. We disable it to ensure that the resulting symbol is really `__c_greetings`.
```

extern "C" fn __c_greetings(__0: *const core::ffi::c_char) -> () {
    // `traits` module is `hs-bindgen::hs-bindgen-traits`
    // n.b. do not forget to import it, e.g., with `use hs-bindgen::*`
    traits::ReprC::from(greetings(traits::ReprRust::from(__0),))
}
```

… and will also generate the following Haskell code:

```haskell

> -- This file was generated by `hs-bindgen` crate and contain C FFI bindings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- This file was generated by `hs-bindgen` crate and contains C FFI bindings
```

Fix the typo in the generator if it is in there too ;)

-- wrappers for every Rust function annotated with `#[hs_bindgen]`

{-# LANGUAGE ForeignFunctionInterface #-}

-- Why not rather using `{-# LANGUAGE CApiFFI #-}` language extension?
--
-- * Because it's GHC specific and not part of the Haskell standard:
--   https://ghc.gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/doc/users_guide/exts/ffi.html ;
--
-- * Because the capabilities it gave (by rather works on top of symbols of a C
--   header file) can't work in our case. Maybe we want a future with an
--   {-# LANGUAGE RustApiFFI #-} language extension that would enable us to
--   work on top of a `.rs` source file (or a `.rlib`, but this is unlikely as

> --   this format has purposely no public specifications).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--   this format has purposely no public specification).
```

{-# OPTIONS_GHC -Wno-unused-imports #-}

module Greetings (greetings) where

import Data.Int
import Data.Word
import Foreign.C.String
import Foreign.C.Types
import Foreign.Ptr

foreign import ccall unsafe "__c_greetings" greetings :: CString -> IO (())
```

In Rust, [`extern`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch19-01-unsafe-rust.html#using-extern-functions-to-call-external-code) is an alias to `extern "C"` that stands for “use the C call convention” rather than `extern "Rust"` that use the Rust one, which is the default implicitly used.

> **Why C ABI (Application Binary Interface)?**
>
> The Rust [ABI](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/external-blocks.html#abi) (call-convention and types [memory layout](https://cheats.rs/#memory-layout)) isn’t stable. That means that it’s specified internally but could be broken by any `rustc` minor release, building a software on top of it is by definition a “hack” …
>
> And, if we think it’s worth it, we would have to perform our bindgen against a given `rustc` version (and that would be really laborious to maintain) …
>

> > So, do not fear the C ABI … because, at least, it is stable!

Reviewer: Also the main argument is probably that GHC doesn't know anything about Rust calling convention, while it does about C's calling convention. C's calling convention is the lingua franca of Rustc/GHC.

Author: That's sure! But I mean even with a big GHC development effort to support Rust calling convention, we have to be aware that `rustc` calling convention isn't a public API on which we could build things on top … Since version 1.0.0 of the language, `rustc` core team pushed several calling convention break non-retro-compatible changes … We have to consider that linking 2 rust binaries built with different minor `rustc` version is `unsafe` …

Author: https://blaz.is/blog/post/we-dont-need-a-stable-abi/ mention it, but I do not know if it's a valuable source of truth.

Author: I reworked the paragraph, integrating your main argument for clarity :)

>
> **To go further:** I invite you to read *[“Rust does not have a stable ABI”](https://viruta.org/rust-stable-abi.html)* by Federico Mena Quintero: a blog post discussing how much the absence of Rust stable ABI isn't a big deal in the context of GTK development. Highlighting that *[“How Swift Achieved Dynamic Linking Where Rust Couldn't”](https://faultlore.com/blah/swift-abi/)* by Aria Beingessner isn't so far from [`GObject` Introspection](https://gi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) strategy!

## Implementation

The previous code example highlighted that we rely on two constructs: an attribute procedural macro [`#[hs_bindgen]`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/hs-bindgen), and (internally) `ReprRust` and `ReprC` traits.

> **Why use a Rust macro?**
>

> > Binding code generation could have been achieved using an external tool, e.g., `c-bindgen` parses Rust code (before macro expansion) and deduce the right C function signatures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Binding code generation could have been achieved using an external tool, e.g., `c-bindgen` parses Rust code (before macro expansion) and deduces the right C function signatures.
```

>

> > But rather we choose to define a custom macro (like `cxx`, `wasm-bindgen` and `PyO3` does), and so we require the user to depend on a custom crate. Why?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> But instead we decided to define a custom macro (like `cxx`, `wasm-bindgen`, and `PyO3` do), and so we require the user to depend on a custom crate.
```

>

> > We want generated bindings to always match the source code used for generation, so we want to force the user to integrate binding generation in the build process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The reason is that we want generated bindings to always match the source code used for their generation. By using a macro we enforce binding generation during the build process and bindings can't get out-of-sync.
```

>

> > The natural way to do that in Rust, and to have directly access to source code's AST (Abstract Syntax Tree), rather than trying to implement a parser, is to use a macro!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In addition macros have direct access to source code's AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) and don't require the use of a parser.
```

Author: I think my phrasing is a bit incorrect here, since Rust procedural or attribute macro take as input a `TokenStream` rather than a structured AST, there is still parsing to do (that what the `syn` crate does). Maybe this is details of implementation, my point is more “there will still be parsing, but we do not implement a custom parser”.

Reviewer: I struggled to reformulate this. Perhaps that it goes without saying it explicitly and you could just remove this sentence?

Author: I just removed this sentence!

>

> > **To go further:** `c-bindgen` is well known to be buggy! It's a flaw in its design to have a custom Rust source parser, rather using the framework implement here for `hs-bindgen` would allow us to provide a better `c-bindgen` implementation.

Reviewer: > `c-bindgen` is well known to be buggy!

[Citation needed]

Author: https://blaz.is/blog/post/we-dont-need-a-stable-abi/ mention it, but I do not know if it's a valuable source of truth.

Reviewer: Perhaps soften the wording then. Just mention that `c-bindgen` could reuse `hs-bindgen` implementation instead of rolling out his own Rust source parser.

Author: I reformulate it :)

> Wrapping user types by these traits have several benefits:

Reviewer: Reintroduce traits here because they were mentioned quite some paragraphs ago. Something like:

```
Traits are the second building block after the `hs-bindgen` macro. They are used to map Rust types to Haskell types (iiuc) as follows...
```

 Perhaps draw an analogy with type-classes so that Haskellers understand what traits are.

Author: I added a little paragraph :)

* Unsupported types are nicely reported as _“the trait `ReprRust<T>` is not implemented for `U`”_ error (that suggest other types that the trait implement to the user);

* The user can extensively always implement these traits for arbitrary types ;

* Provided traits implementation for `std` types take care of memory management ;

* Traits improve a lot of ergonomics by implicitly and safely casting a given type to an FFI-safe one.

> **What's an FFI-safe type?**
>
> `rustc` will complain if a function prefixed by `extern` keyword use as arguments types that are not FFI-safe. FFI-safe types guarantee that a type has a [specified layout](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html) (memory representation) by e.g. having a [`#[repr(C)]`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/other-reprs.html#reprc) compiler attribute, for the given C call convention.

> **To go further:** speaking of memory management, the strategy implemented here is: freeing the value is the role of the receiver (which has “ownership” of it). This means that, e.g. the type that return a Rust function, will not be [`Drop`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Drop.html) by Rust but rather should be [`free`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base/docs/Foreign-Marshal-Alloc.html) on Haskell side! I also invite you to read *[“FFI safety and GC”](https://frasertweedale.github.io/blog-fp/posts/2022-09-23-ffi-safety-and-gc.html)* by Fraser Tweedale: a blog post discussing FFI `unsafe` keyword and Garbage Collection in Haskell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**To go further:** the memory management strategy is: freeing the value is the role of the receiver (which has “ownership” of it). This means that values returned by Rust functions aren't [`dropped`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Drop.html) by Rust but rather should be [`freed`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base/docs/Foreign-Marshal-Alloc.html) on the Haskell side!

Currently `hs-bindgen` only generates `unsafe` Haskell foreign imports. In the future it could generate `safe` ones too. I invite you to read *[“FFI safety and GC”](https://frasertweedale.github.io/blog-fp/posts/2022-09-23-ffi-safety-and-gc.html)* by Fraser Tweedale or GHC's users guide to understand the differences between `unsafe`/`safe`.
```

## DevX

[`cargo-cabal`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal) is a CLI tool that helps you, in one simple command, turning a Rust crate into a Haskell Cabal library!

> I was heavily inspired by the developer experience that offers [`wasm-pack`](https://rustwasm.github.io/docs/wasm-pack/) or [`maturin`](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin): launched in any Rust project folder, it helps the user to interactively tweak their `Cargo.toml` to make it successfully build a package compatible with NPM / PyPI and even handle the publishing of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I was heavily inspired by the developer experience that offers [`wasm-pack`](https://rustwasm.github.io/docs/wasm-pack/) or [`maturin`](https://github.com/PyO3/maturin): launched in any Rust project folder, these tools help the user to interactively tweak their `Cargo.toml` package file to make sure it is compatible with NPM / PyPI. They even handle the publication of the package on NPM registry and on PyPI package index.
```

Reviewer: I know next to nothing about these tools, and it shows :)

Author: I apply your corrections, reformulate it and remove the last sentence :)

What `cargo-cabal` actually does is:

> * Ask user to add `crate-type = ["staticlib"]` (or `"cdylib"`, dynamic libraries require an extra [`build.rs`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal/blob/main/src/build.rs) that is generated by `cargo-cabal`) to their `Cargo.toml` ;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ask the user to add `crate-type = ["staticlib"]` (or `"cdylib"`, dynamic libraries require an extra [`build.rs`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal/blob/main/src/build.rs) file that is generated by `cargo-cabal`) to their `Cargo.toml` file;
```

> * Generate a custom `X.cabal` linking `rustc` output as `extra-librairies`, and either a ([`naersk`](https://github.com/nix-community/naersk) and [`haskell.nix`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/haskell.nix) based) `flake.nix` or a [`Setup.lhs`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal/blob/main/src/Setup.lhs) build customization (to work around this [issue](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/2641)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Generate a custom `X.cabal` linking `rustc` output as `extra-librairies`, and either a ([`naersk`](https://github.com/nix-community/naersk) and [`haskell.nix`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/haskell.nix) based) `flake.nix` or a [`Setup.lhs`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal/blob/main/src/Setup.lhs) Cabal build script (to work around this [issue](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/2641)).
```

> **To go further:** there is no first-class `stack` support yet provided, but we could easily imagine a `cargo-stack` binary that just wrap a `cargo-cabal --stack` CLI option!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**To go further:** `stack` isn't supported yet, but we could easily imagine a `cargo-stack` binary that just wraps a `cargo-cabal --stack` CLI option!
```

## Limitations

> What would be the reason to NOT use `cargo-cabal` and `hs-bindgen`? I should mention that `{-# LANGUAGE CApiFFI #-}` language extension features, like using C values that are `#define` in a header or `vargs`, are not supported (because they're indeed C specific). E.g. variadic arguments didn't exist in Rust and are usually implemented with [the Builder pattern](https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.0.0/style/ownership/builders.html). Again I want to make obvious that if you're looking for `CApiFFI` features you should embed Rust code in a C library, with e.g. `c-bindgen`, and so not use the tools introduced here!

Reviewer: I don't understand this limitation. Haskell also doesn't support varargs. Why would we want to use `CApiFFI` to interact with Rust?

You'd better mention `safe` that is currently unsupported. Or perhaps just remove the section if there is no major drawback to using your solution compared to writing bindings manually.

Author: Yes, you're right. I will just remove this section for now. Maybe come back to it in a follow-up article!

## What's next?

[`cargo-cabal`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/cargo-cabal) and [`hs-bindgen`](https://github.com/yvan-sraka/hs-bindgen) combined are less than 1000 LoC, they also support Rust `#[no_std]` code, and I would be glad to keep them as [KISS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KISS_principle) and modular as possible. But there is still room for improvements, e.g. by adding traits' implementations for more Rust `std` types, or why not supporting `async` functions with [`async-ffi`](https://github.com/oxalica/async-ffi)?!

> Furthermore, It’s also nice to give a sneak peek on what others do for comparison: **OCaml** [allows extensions to be written directly in Rust with no C stubs](https://docs.rs/ocaml), this work was supported from the [OCaml Software Foundation](http://ocaml-sf.org/) and you can find [a basic example project here](http://github.com/zshipko/ocaml-rust-starter). It offers [safe OCaml/Rust interoperability](https://github.com/simplestaking/ocaml-interop), meaning utilities to convert ADTs (Algebraic Data Types) and function using them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, It’s also nice to give a sneak peek on what others do for comparison: **OCaml** [allows extensions to be written directly in Rust with no C stubs](https://docs.rs/ocaml), this work was supported from the [OCaml Software Foundation](http://ocaml-sf.org/) and you can find [a basic example project here](http://github.com/zshipko/ocaml-rust-starter). It offers [safe OCaml/Rust interoperability](https://github.com/simplestaking/ocaml-interop), meaning utilities to convert ADTs (Algebraic Data Types) and functions using them.
```

It would be delightful to get as far as having custom preludes in Haskell binding code generated that offers Rust type layout in Haskell. E.g. Rust [slices](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch04-03-slices.html) are not an existing concept in C but could be easily represented as an FFI-safe struct.

> Finally, It’s worth mentioning that there are also proposals to improve the interface between Haskell programs requiring Rust libraries, including this Cabal [RFC](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7906). As a reminder, the implementation proposed here does not provide support for Haskell dependencies in Rust project yet, but there is a previous [unmaintained attempt](https://github.com/mgattozzi/curryrs) by Michael Gattozzi of bringing Haskell runtime support in Rust binaries. We should also keep a close look on the Rust RFC that offer to introduce a `#[repr(interop)]` attribute: [Experimental feature gate proposal `interoperable_abi`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/105586).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, it’s worth mentioning that there are also proposals to improve the interface between Haskell programs requiring Rust libraries, including this Cabal [RFC](https://github.com/haskell/cabal/issues/7906). As a reminder, the implementation proposed here does not provide support for Haskell dependencies in Rust project yet, but there is a previous [unmaintained attempt](https://github.com/mgattozzi/curryrs) by Michael Gattozzi of bringing Haskell runtime support in Rust binaries. We should also keep a close look on the Rust RFC that offers to introduce a `#[repr(interop)]` attribute: [Experimental feature gate proposal `interoperable_abi`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/105586).
```

> I would like to thank [@hsyl20](https://github.com/hsyl20), [@iquerejeta](https://github.com/iquerejeta) and [@govanify](https://github.com/govanify) for their careful reviewing and corrections they provide to make this article in good shape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I would like to thank [@hsyl20](https://github.com/hsyl20), [@iquerejeta](https://github.com/iquerejeta) and [@govanify](https://github.com/govanify) for their reviews and for their helpful suggestions.
```

> Thanks for reading, feel free to experiment with this Proof of Concept and to provide feedbacks on GitHub :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks for reading, feel free to experiment with this Proof of Concept and to provide feedback on GitHub!
```
